---
title: 2021 Publications
author: 'Nathaniel DeVoss'
date: '2023-01-26'
slug: 2021 publications
categories: [website, updates]
tags: [lab, website, updates, ISCB]
description: ''
linktitle: ''
type: post
---

__<a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8732818/" target="_blank">Liquid biopsies in epilepsy: biomarkers for etiology, diagnosis, prognosis, and therapeutics</a>__

Journal: Human Cell<br>
Authors: Jordan H. Whitlock, Tabea M. Soelter, Avery S. Williams, Andrew A. Hardigan, and Brittany N. Lasseigne

Epilepsy is one of the most common diseases of the central nervous system, impacting nearly 50 million people around the world. Heterogeneous in nature, epilepsy presents in children and adults alike. Currently, surgery is one treatment approach that can completely cure epilepsy. However, not all individuals are eligible for surgical procedures or have successful outcomes. In addition to surgical approaches, antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) have also allowed individuals with epilepsy to achieve freedom from seizures. Others have found treatment through nonpharmacologic approaches such as vagus nerve stimulation, or responsive neurostimulation. Difficulty in accessing samples of human brain tissue along with advances in sequencing technology have driven researchers to investigate sampling liquid biopsies in blood, serum, plasma, and cerebrospinal fluid within the context of epilepsy. Liquid biopsies provide minimal or non-invasive sample collection approaches and can be assayed relatively easily across multiple time points, unlike tissue-based sampling. Various efforts have investigated circulating nucleic acids from these samples including microRNAs, cell-free DNA, transfer RNAs, and long non-coding RNAs. Here, we review nucleic acid-based liquid biopsies in epilepsy to improve understanding of etiology, diagnosis, prediction, and therapeutic monitoring.


__<a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8043167/" target="_blank">A role for GLUT3 in glioblastoma cell invasion that is not recapitulated by GLUT1</a>__

Journal: Cell Adhesion & Migration<br>
Authors: Catherine J Libby, Sajina Gc, Gloria A. Benavides, Jennifer L. Fisher, Sarah E. Williford, Sixue Zhang, Anh Nhat Tran, Emily R. Gordon, Amber B. Jones, Kaysaw Tuy, William Flavahan, Juan Gordillo, Ashlee Long, Sara J. Cooper, Brittany N. Lasseigne, Corinne E. Augelli-Szafran, Victor Darley-Usmar, and Anita B. Hjelmeland

The multifaceted roles of metabolism in invasion have been investigated across many cancers. The brain tumor glioblastoma (GBM) is a highly invasive and metabolically plastic tumor with an inevitable recurrence. The neuronal glucose transporter 3 (GLUT3) was previously reported to correlate with poor glioma patient survival and be upregulated in GBM cells to promote therapeutic resistance and survival under restricted glucose conditions. It has been suggested that the increased glucose uptake mediated by GLUT3 elevation promotes survival of circulating tumor cells to facilitate metastasis. Here we suggest a more direct role for GLUT3 in promoting invasion that is not dependent upon changes in cell survival or metabolism. Analysis of glioma datasets demonstrated that GLUT3, but not GLUT1, expression was elevated in invasive disease. In human xenograft derived GBM cells, GLUT3, but not GLUT1, elevation significantly increased invasion in transwell assays, but not growth or migration. Further, there were no changes in glycolytic metabolism that correlated with invasive phenotypes. We identified the GLUT3 C-terminus as mediating invasion: substituting the C-terminus of GLUT1 for that of GLUT3 reduced invasion. RNA-seq analysis indicated changes in extracellular matrix organization in GLUT3 overexpressing cells, including upregulation of osteopontin. Together, our data suggest a role for GLUT3 in increasing tumor cell invasion that is not recapitulated by GLUT1, is separate from its role in metabolism and survival as a glucose transporter, and is likely broadly applicable since GLUT3 expression correlates with metastasis in many solid tumors.


---
**Nathaniel DeVoss** -- _January 26th, 2023_<br>